      Transportmetrica B: Transport Dynamics




      ISSN: 2168-0566 (Print) 2168-0582 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/ttrb20




Learning heuristics for transit network design
and improvement with deep reinforcement
learning

Andrew Holliday, Ahmed El-Geneidy & Gregory Dudek

To cite this article: Andrew Holliday, Ahmed El-Geneidy & Gregory Dudek (2025) Learning
heuristics for transit network design and improvement with deep reinforcement learning,
Transportmetrica B: Transport Dynamics, 13:1, 2561863, DOI: 10.1080/21680566.2025.2561863

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/21680566.2025.2561863




       © 2025 The Author(s). Published by Informa
       UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis
       Group.

       Published online: 17 Oct 2025.



       Submit your article to this journal



       Article views: 1399



       View related articles



       View Crossmark data




                      Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
             https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ttrb20
TRANSPORTMETRICA B: TRANSPORT DYNAMICS
2025, VOL. 13, NO. 1, 2561863
https://doi.org/10.1080/21680566.2025.2561863




Learning heuristics for transit network design and improvement with deep
reinforcement learning
Andrew Holliday               a , Ahmed El-Geneidyb and Gregory Dudeka

a McGill University Center for Intelligent Machines, Montreal, Canada; b McGill University School of Urban Planning, Montreal, Canada



    ABSTRACT                                                                                                                        ARTICLE HISTORY
    Planning a network of public transit routes is a challenging optimisation problem. Meta-                                        Received 28 February 2025
    heuristic algorithms search through the space of possible transit networks by applying                                          Accepted 13 July 2025
    heuristics that randomly alter routes in a network. Existing algorithms almost exclusively                                      KEYWORDS
    use heuristics that modify the network in purely random ways. In this work, we explore                                          Public transit; urban
    whether we can obtain better transit networks using more intelligent heuristics, that mod-                                      planning; neural networks;
    ify networks according to a learned preference function instead of at random. We use                                            reinforcement learning;
    reinforcement learning to train graph neural nets to act as heuristics. These neural heuris-                                    optimisation
    tics yield improved results on benchmark synthetic cities with 70 nodes or more, and
    achieve new state-of-the-art results on the challenging Mumford benchmark. They also
    improve upon a simulation of the real transit network in the city of Laval, Canada, achieving
    cost savings of up to 19% over the city’s existing transit network.



1. Introduction
The COVID-19 pandemic caused declines in transit ridership in cities around the world (Liu, Miller, and
Scheff 2020), putting many transit agencies under pressure to reduce operating costs (Kar et al. 2022). By
improving a transit network’s spatial layout, it may be possible to reduce costs while improving service quality.
But network redesigns can be very costly and are disruptive for riders, so it is vital that agencies get a design
(or re-design) right the first time. Good algorithms for the transit network design problem (NDP) can therefore
be very useful to transit agencies.
   The NDP is the problem of designing a high-quality set of transit routes for a city. It is an NP-hard problem,
and real-world cities typically have hundreds or even thousands of transit stops, making analytical optimi-
sation approaches infeasible. The most successful approaches to the NDP to-date have been metaheuristic
algorithms. These repeatedly apply heuristics that randomly change a network, and use a metaheuristic rule
such as natural selection or metallic annealing to decide which changes to keep.
   Different heuristics used in these algorithms make different kinds of changes to networks, such as randomly
removing a stop from a route, or randomly exchanging two stops on a route. What most heuristics have in
common is that they make changes purely at random, ignoring the particulars of the network or city. In this
work, we use deep reinforcement learning (DRL) to train neural-net-based heuristics to choose changes to a
transit network based on information about the city and the current network. We integrate these with a simple
evolutionary algorithm to form what we call a Neural Evolutionary Algorithm, and we show that in challenging
scenarios, this technique outperforms existing non-neural algorithms.
   This paper expands on our prior work (Holliday and Dudek 2023, 2024) in a number of ways. We present new
results obtained with an improved evolutionary algorithm and an improved graph neural net (GNN) model
trained via Proximal Policy Optimization instead of REINFORCE. We compare these results with state-of-the-art
methods on the widely-used (Mandl 1980) and (Mumford 2013a) benchmark cities, and find that on the most
challenging benchmarks our method sets a new state of the art, improving on other methods by up to 4.8%.
   We also report on ablation studies that show the importance of different features of our method. As part
of these studies, we consider a novel non-neural heuristic, where shortest paths with common end-points are

CONTACT Andrew Holliday          andrew.holliday@mail.mcgill.ca     McGill University Center for Intelligent Machines, 3480 University Street,
McConnell Engineering Building, Room 410, Montreal, QC H3A 0E9, Canada
© 2025 The Author(s). Published by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives License (http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, and is not
altered, transformed, or built upon in any way. The terms on which this article has been published allow the posting of the Accepted Manuscript in a repository by the
author(s) or with their consent.
2      A. HOLLIDAY ET AL.


joined uniformly at random instead of according to the GNN’s output. Interestingly, we find that in the narrow
case where we are only concerned with minimising passenger travel time, this heuristic outperforms both the
baseline heuristics of Nikolić and Teodorović (2013) and our GNN heuristic; in most other cases, however, our
GNN heuristic performs better.
   Finally, we perform a case study, applying our neural heuristics to a simulation of the real-world city of
Laval, Canada, showing that they can plan transit networks that improve on the city’s existing transit system
by a wide margin by three distinct optimisation criteria. These results show that neural heuristics may allow
transit agencies to offer better service at less cost.




2. Background and related work
2.1. Deep learning for optimisation problems
Deep reinforcement learning refers to the use of ‘deep’ artificial neural nets – that is, neural nets with many
hidden layers – as reinforcement learning (RL) models. RL is a branch of machine learning concerned with
learning from feedback that comes in the form of a numerical ‘reward’ that indicates how good or bad the
model’s outputs are, so that its outputs change to maximise the reward it receives. As documented in Bengio,
Lodi, and Prouvost (2021), there is growing interest in the application of deep RL to combinatorial optimisation
(CO) problems.
    Vinyals, Fortunato, and Jaitly (2015) proposed a deep neural net model called a Pointer Network, and trained
it via supervised learning to solve instances of the travelling salesman problem (TSP). This work has been built
on by Dai et al. (2017), Kool, Hoof, and Welling (2019), Sykora, Ren, and Urtasun (2020) and others, training sim-
ilar neural net models with reinforcement learning to construct CO solutions. These have attained impressive
performance on the TSP, the vehicle routing problem (VRP), and other CO problems. More recently, Mundhenk
et al. (2021) train a recurrent neural net (RNN) via RL to construct a starting population of solutions to a genetic
algorithm, the outputs of which are used to further train the RNN. Fu, Qiu, and Zha (2021) train a model on small
TSP instances and present an algorithm that applies the model to much larger instances. Choo et al. (2022)
present a hybrid algorithm of Monte Carlo Tree Search and Beam Search that draws better sample solutions
for the TSP and Capacitated VRP (CVRP) from a neural net policy like that of Kool, Hoof, and Welling (2019).
    These approaches all belong to the family of ‘construction’ methods, which solve a CO problem by starting
with an ‘empty’ solution and adding to it until it is complete – for example, in the TSP, this would mean con-
structing a path one node at a time, starting with an empty path and stopping once the path includes all nodes.
The solutions from these neural construction methods come close to the quality of those from specialised algo-
rithms such as Concorde (Applegate et al. 2001), while requiring much less run-time to compute (Kool, Hoof,
and Welling 2019).
    By contrast with construction methods, ‘improvement’ methods start with a complete solution and repeat-
edly modify it, searching through the solution space for improvements. In the TSP example, this might involve
starting with a complete path, and swapping pairs of nodes in the path at each step to see if the path
is shortened. Because this search process can continue indefinitely, improvement methods are generally
more computationally costly than construction methods, but can yield better results. Evolutionary algorithms
belong to this category.
    Some work (Chen and Tian 2019; da Costa et al. 2020; Hottung and Tierney 2019; Ma et al. 2021; Y. Wu
et al. 2021), has considered training neural nets to choose the search moves to be made at each step of an
improvement method. Meanwhile Kim, Park, and Kim (2021) train one neural net to construct a set of initial
solutions, and another to modify and improve them. And more recently, Ye et al. (2024) train a neural net to
provide a heuristic score for choices in CO problems in the context of an ant colony optimisation algorithm.
This work has shown impressive performance on the TSP, VRP, and similar CO problems.
    In most of the above work, the neural net models used are graph neural nets, a type of neural net
model that is designed to operate on graph-structured data (Bruna et al. 2013; Defferrard, Bresson, and
Vandergheynst 2016; Duvenaud et al. 2015; Kipf and Welling 2016). These have been applied in many
other domains, including the analysis of large web graphs (Ying et al. 2018), the design of printed circuit
boards (Mirhoseini et al. 2021), and the prediction of chemical properties of molecules (Duvenaud et al. 2015;
                                                                                 TRANSPORTMETRICA B: TRANSPORT DYNAMICS   3


                        Table 1. Statistics of the Mandl and Mumford benchmark cities.
                        City       # nodes n   # link edges |Es |   # routes S   MIN   MAX   Area (km2 )
                        Mandl         15              20                6          2     8      352.7
                        Mumford0      30              90               12          2    15      354.2
                        Mumford1      70             210               15         10    30      858.5
                        Mumford2     110             385               56         10    22     1394.3
                        Mumford3     127             425               60         12    25     1703.2



Gilmer et al. 2017). An overview of GNNs is provided by Battaglia et al. (2018). Like many CO problems, the NDP
lends itself to being described as a graph problem, so we use GNN models here as well.
   CO problems also have in common that it is difficult to find a globally optimal solution but easier to gauge
the quality of a given solution. As Bengio, Lodi, and Prouvost (2021) note, this makes reinforcement learning a
natural fit to CO problems. Most of the work cited in this section uses RL methods to train neural net models.


2.2. Optimization of public transit
The above work all concerns a small set of classical CO problems including the TSP and VRP. Like the NDP,
some of these are NP-hard, and all can be described as graph problems. But the NDP resembles these classical
problems much less than they do each other: transit routes can interact by transferring passengers, and the
space of solutions for a problem instance of given size is much vaster in the NDP. For example, take the Mum-
ford0 benchmark city described in Table 1. With 30 nodes there are 30! ≈ 2.7 × 1032 possible TSP tours, but
for 12 routes with at least 2 and at most 15 stops each, there are approximately 2.3 × 1011 possible routes and
          11 
so 2.3×10
       12       ≈ 4.3 × 10127 possible transit networks, a factor of 1095 more.
    The difference is further shown by the fact that the state-of-the-art on classic problems like the TSP uses
analytical and mathematical programming methods (such as Applegate et al. 2001), but on the NDP, such
methods are not used. These differences necessitate a special treatment, so our work deals only with the NDP,
as does most other recent work on the problem (Ahmed, Mumford, and Kheiri 2019; Hüsselmann, van Vuuren,
and Andersen 2024; Islam et al. 2019; John, Mumford, and Lewis 2014; Kılıç and Gök 2014; Lin and Tang 2022;
Mumford 2013a; Zervas et al. 2024).
    While analytical and mathematical programming methods have been successful on small instances (Guan,
Yang, and Wirasinghe 2006; van Nes 2003), they struggle to realistically represent the problem (Guihaire and
Hao 2008; Kepaptsoglou and Karlaftis 2009). Metaheuristic approaches, as defined by Sörensen, Sevaux, and
Glover (2018), have thus been more widely applied, both for the NDP and the related Frequency-Setting
Problem (Aksoy and Mutlu 2024).
    The most widely-used metaheuristics for the NDP have been genetic algorithms, simulated annealing, and
ant-colony optimisation, along with hybrids of these methods (Durán-Micco and Vansteenwegen 2022; Gui-
haire and Hao 2008; Hüsselmann, van Vuuren, and Andersen 2024; Kepaptsoglou and Karlaftis 2009; Yang and
Jiang 2020). Recent work has also shown other metaheuristics can be used with success, such as sequence-
based selection hyper-heuristics (Ahmed, Mumford, and Kheiri 2019), beam search (Islam et al. 2019), and
particle swarms (Lin and Tang 2022). Many different heuristics have been applied within these metaheuris-
tic algorithms, but most have in common that they select among possible neighbourhood moves uniformly
at random.
    An exception is Hüsselmann, van Vuuren, and Andersen (2024). For two heuristics, the authors design a
simple model of how each change the heuristic could make would affect the network’s quality. The heuristics
then weight the probability of making different changes according to this model, with higher-quality changes
being more likely. The resulting heuristics obtain state-of-the-art results. However, their simple model ignores
passenger trips involving transfers and the impact of the user’s preferences over different parts of the cost
function. By contrast, the method we propose learns a model of changes’ impacts to assign probabilities to
those changes, and does so based on a richer set of inputs.
    While neural nets have been used for predictive problems in urban mobility (Chien, Ding, and Wei 2002;
Çodur and Tortum 2009; Jeong and Rilett 2004; Li, Bai, Liu et al. 2020; Rodrigue 1997; F. Wu et al. 2025; Xiong
and Schneider 1992) and for other transit optimisation problems such as scheduling, passenger flow control,
and traffic signal control (Ai et al. 2022; Jiang et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2024; F. Wu et al. 2025; Yan et al. 2023;
4      A. HOLLIDAY ET AL.


Zhang et al. 2023; Zou, Xu, and Zhu 2006), they have not often been applied to the NDP. The same is true of RL:
Li, Bai, Yao et al. (2023) review the work on the application of RL to public transit, and find only one instance in
which it was used for network design: the work of Wei et al. (2020). In this work, the authors train a neural net
policy via RL to design a single new metro route for the city of Xi’an, China. They obtain good results in that
case, but their model of the problem differs from ours in not requiring the network to connect all stations, and
their method does not go beyond planning a single route.
    Two other recent examples are Darwish, Khalil, and Badawi (2020) and Yoo, Lee, and Han (2023). Both use RL
to design routes and a schedule for the Mandl benchmark (Mandl 1980), a very small city, and both obtain good
results. Darwish, Khalil, and Badawi (2020) use a GNN approach inspired by Kool, Hoof, and Welling (2019); in
our own work we experimented with a nearly identical approach to Darwish, Khalil, and Badawi (2020), but
we found it did not scale beyond very small instances. Meanwhile, Yoo, Lee, and Han (2023) use tabular RL, an
approach that is practical only for small problem sizes.
    All three of these approaches also require a new model to be trained on each problem instance. Our
approach, by contrast, finds good solutions for NDP instances of more than 600 nodes, and can be applied
to instances unseen during model training.


3. The transit network design problem
In the transit network design problem, a city is represented as an augmented graph:

                                                     G = (N , Es , D)                                              (1)

This consists of a set N of n nodes, representing candidate stop locations; a set Es of link edges (i, j, τij ) repre-
senting streets or railways that connect the nodes, with weights τij indicating travel times on those links; and
an n × n matrix D giving the travel demand, in number of trips, between every pair of nodes in N . Our goal is
to find a transit network R that minimises a cost function C : G , R → R+ . R is a set of routes where each route
r ∈ R is a sequence of nodes in N . R is subject to the following constraints:

(1) R must satisfy all demand, providing some path over transit between every pair of nodes (i, j) ∈ N for
    which Dij > 0.
(2) R must contain exactly S routes (|R| = S), where S is given at the start.
(3) All routes r ∈ R must obey MIN ≤ |r| ≤ MAX, where MIN and MAX are parameters set by the user.
(4) Routes r ∈ R may not contain cycles; each node i ∈ N can appear in r at most once.

   An example city graph with a transit network is shown in Figure 1.
   We deal here with the symmetric NDP, meaning that all demand, links, and routes are the same in both
directions:

                                           D = D                                                                  (2)
                                           (i, j, τij ) ∈ Es   iff. (j, i, τij ) ∈ Es                              (3)

and all routes are traversed both forwards and backwards by vehicles on them. This allows us to evaluate our
method against the large number of other methods that evaluate on symmetric benchmark cities, but we note
that extending our method to the asymmetric NDP would be straightforward.


3.1. Cost functions
Work on the NDP usually considers two separate cost functions: the passenger cost Cp , and the operating cost
Co (Ahmed, Mumford, and Kheiri 2019; Hüsselmann, van Vuuren, and Andersen 2024; John, Mumford, and
Lewis 2014; Kılıç and Gök 2014; Nikolić and Teodorović 2013). We present the standard definitions of these
terms used in this work below.
                                                                            TRANSPORTMETRICA B: TRANSPORT DYNAMICS           5




Figure 1. An example city graph with ten numbered nodes and three routes. Link edges (representing streets or railways) are
black, routes are in colour, and demands are shown by dashed red lines. The edges of the three routes form a subgraph of
the link graph (N , Es ). All node-pairs are connected by this subgraph, so the three routes form a valid transit network. The
demand between nodes 2 and 5 and between 0 and 6 can be satisﬁed directly by riding on the blue line, and the demand from
7 to 4 by the orange line. The demand from 3 to 9 requires passengers to ride the orange line from node 3 to 8, and transfer to
the green line to go from 8 to 9.

   Cp is defined as the average time of passenger trips over the network:
                                                        
                                                          i,j Dij τRij
                                            Cp (G , R) =                                                                  (4)
                                                              i,j Dij

where τRij is the time of the shortest transit trip from i to j given R, including a time penalty for each transfer
between routes.
  The operating cost is the total driving time of the routes:
                                                               
                                                 Co (G , R) =      τr                                           (5)
                                                                   r∈R

Where τr is the time needed to completely traverse a route r in one direction.
   We use these standard definitions in evaluating our algorithm. However, our metaheuristic detailed in Sub-
section 4.2 requires a single cost function to operate, and our DRL technique requires that this function not
range much beyond [−1, 1], as numerically large values can cause problems with neural net training. So we
define a unified cost function C that combines passenger and operating costs and a third term that penalises
constraint violations that may occur during training.
   In C, we use a modified passenger cost Cp :
                                          
                                            i,j Dij (δRij τRij + (1 − δRij )2 maxk,l Tkl )
                             Cp (G , R) =                                                                 (6)
                                                                   i,j Dij

δRij is a delta function with value 1 if R provides a path from i to j, and 0 if not. T is an n × n matrix of shortest-
path travel times between every node pair. Each demand that is not satisfied induces a penalty of 2 maxk,l Tkl ,
penalising it, where maxk,l Tkl is the maximum travel time between any two nodes in the graph. If R satisfies
constraint 1, then δRij = 1 ∀ i, j and Cp reduces to the original Cp .
  The constraint-violation cost Cc is:
                                               Cc (G , R) = Fun + Fs + 0.1δv                                               (7)
Fun is the fraction of node pairs (i, j) with Dij > 0 for which R provides no path. Fs is a smoothly increasing
function of the extent to which the routes in R violate constraint 3:
                                            
                                                  max(0, MIN − |r|, |r| − MAX)
                                     Fs = r∈R                                                                (8)
                                                         S ∗ MAX
δv is a delta function that has value 1 if Fun > 0 or Fs > 0, and has value 0 otherwise.
6      A. HOLLIDAY ET AL.


    This definition implies that when there are no constraint violations, Cc = 0. We use fractional measures Fun
and Fs so that usually, Cc < 2, as long as MIN and MAX scale roughly with n. However, it has the drawback that
if n is large, and if R violates only a few constraints, Fun and Fs may become vanishingly small compared to
Co and Cp . This could lead to some constraint violations being permitted. To prevent this, we include the term
0.1δv , which ensures that even one violation will significantly increase overall cost C(G , R), no matter the size
of the city graph.
    Cc does not penalise violations of constraints 2 and 4, because the Markov Decision Process (MDP) detailed
in Subsection 3.2 and the metaheuristic detailed in Subsection 4.2 are, by design, incapable of producing
networks that violate these constraints.
    The unified cost function is:

                                     C(G , R) = αwp Cp + (1 − α)wo Co + βCc                                         (9)

The weight α ∈ [0, 1] controls the trade-off between passenger and operating costs, while β is the constraint
violation weight. wp and wo are re-scaling constants chosen so that wp Cp and wo Co both vary roughly over the
range [0, 1) for different G and R. The values used are:
                                                          −1
                                              wp = max Tij                                                 (10)
                                                           i,j
                                                                      −1
                                                wo = S max Tij                                                     (11)
                                                                 i,j


3.2. Markov decision process formulation
A Markov Decision Process (MDP) is a formalism used to define problems in RL (Sutton and Barto 2018, Chap-
ter 3). In an MDP, an agent interacts with an environment over a series of timesteps t. At each timestep t, the
environment is in a state st , and the agent observes the state and takes some action at ∈ At , where At is the
set of available actions at that timestep. The environment then transitions to a new state st+1 according to
the state transition distribution P(st+1 | st , at ), and the agent receives a reward Rt ∈ R according to the reward
function Rt = fR (st , at , st+1 ). The agent chooses actions according to its policy π(at |st ), which is a probability
distribution over At given st . In RL, the goal is to find a policy π that maximises the return Gt , defined as the
time-discounted sum of rewards:
                                                         
                                                         tend
                                                  Gt =           γ t−t Rt                                        (12)
                                                         t =t
Where γ ∈ [0, 1] is a parameter that discounts rewards farther in the future, and tend is the final time-step of
the MDP. The sequence of states visited, actions taken, and rewards received from t = 1 to tend constitutes
one episode of the MDP.
   We here define an MDP that constructs a transit network for the transit network design problem (Figure 2).
As shown in Equation (13), the state st is composed of the set of finished routes Rt , and an in-progress route
rt which is currently being planned:
                                                     st = (Rt , rt )                                               (13)
The starting state s1 is (R1 = {}, r1 = []). The MDP alternates at every timestep between two modes: on
odd-numbered timesteps, the agent selects an extension to the route rt that it is currently planning; on even-
numbered timesteps, the agent chooses whether or not to stop extending rt and add it to the set of finished
routes.
   On odd-numbered timesteps, the available actions are drawn from SP, the set of shortest paths between all
pairs of nodes in G . If rt = [], then:
                                           
                                            {a | a ∈ SP, |a| ≤ MAX} if rt = []
                                      At =                                                                 (14)
                                            EXrt                    otherwise

where EXrt is the set of paths a ∈ SP that satisfy all of the following conditions:
                                                                             TRANSPORTMETRICA B: TRANSPORT DYNAMICS      7




Figure 2. A ﬂowchart of the transit network construction process deﬁned by our MDP. Blue boxes indicate points where the
timestep t is incremented and the agent selects an action. Red nodes are the beginning and ending of the process. Green
nodes are hard-coded decision points. Orange nodes show updates to the state s and action space A.


• (i, j, τij ) ∈ Es , where i is the first node of a and j is the last node of rt , or vice-versa
• a and rt have no nodes in common
• |a| ≤ MAX − |rt |

   Once a path at ∈ At is chosen, rt+1 is formed by appending at to the beginning or end of rt as appropriate.
   On even-numbered timesteps, the action space depends on the number of stops in rt :
                                   ⎧
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎨{continue}
                                   ⎪                   if |rt | < MIN
                             At = {halt}               if |rt | = MAX or |EXrt | = 0                      (15)
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎩{continue, halt} otherwise

And the route set Rt+1 and current route rt+1 are determined by the chosen action as follows:
                                              
                                                (Rt ∪ {rt }, []) if at = halt
                             (Rt+1 , rt+1 ) =                                                                         (16)
                                                (Rt , rt )       if at = continue

The episode ends when the S-th route is added to R: that is, if |Rt+1 | = S, the episode ends at timestep t,
and Rt+1 is the final transit network. The reward function is defined as the decrease in cost between each
consecutive pair of timesteps:

                                      Rt = C  (G , Rt ∪ {rt }) − C  (G , Rt+1 ∪ {rt+1 })                            (17)

where C  ((G , R) = C(G , R) − βFs ; that is, C  is the cost function without the Fs term that penalises viola-
tions of constraint 3. We remove Fs because the MDP structure guarantees that the resulting networks satisfy
constraint 3.
   This MDP formalisation imposes some helpful biases on the space of solutions. First, it requires any route
connecting i and j to stop at all nodes along some path between i and j, biasing planned routes towards cov-
ering more nodes. Second, it biases routes towards directness by forcing them to be composed of shortest
paths. While an agent may construct indirect routes by choosing paths with length 2 at every step, this is
unlikely because in realistic link graphs, the majority of paths in SP are longer than two nodes. Third, the alter-
nation between deciding to continue or halt rt and deciding how to extend rt means that the probability of
8      A. HOLLIDAY ET AL.


halting does not depend on how many different extensions are available; so a policy learned in environments
with few possible extensions should generalise to environments with many, and vice versa.


4. Neural heuristics
4.1. Learning to construct a network
To build a neural heuristic, we first train a GNN policy πθ (a | s), parameterised by θ, to maximise the cumulative
return Gt on the construction MDP described in Subsection 3.2. By following this learned policy on the MDP for
some city G , stochastically sampling at from π(· | st ) at each timestep, we obtain a transit network R for that
city. We refer to this learned-policy-based construction algorithm as ‘learned construction’. Because learned
construction samples actions stochastically, we can run it repeatedly to generate multiple networks for a city.
‘LC-100’ denotes the procedure whereby we run learned construction 100 times and choose the best of the
resulting networks. As noted in Subsection 2.2, the NDP has a much wider space of possible solutions than
problems such as the TSP or VRP. To make this tractable, we found it necessary to ‘factorise’ the computation
of the policy on odd-numbered timesteps, since At may be very large. Our policy net outputs a scalar score oaij
for each node pair (i, j) in the graph and each possible extension a. From these, a score oa for each extension
is computed by summing over oaij for all (i, j) that would become directly connected by appending path a to
the current route rt :
                                                                    
                                            oa =          oaij +         oaij                                  (18)
                                                i∈a,j∈a,i=j     i∈rt ,j∈a

where oaii = 0 for all i. With this factorisation, the learning objective becomes estimating the benefit of directly
connecting nodes i and j with travel time τ(rt | a)ij . This is an easier objective than directly estimating the merit
of adding path a to rt .
   The central component of the policy net is a graph attention net (GAT) (Brody, Alon, and Yahav 2021) which
treats the city G as a fully-connected graph with node set N . Each node i has a feature vector xi , and each pair
of nodes (i, j) also has a feature vector eij . These contain information about location, demand, existing transit
routes, and the link edge (if one exists) between i and j.
   The GAT takes the sets of node and node-pair feature vectors, and outputs a set of node embeddings
Y = {yi ∀ i ∈ N }. These are used as input to one of two ‘head’ neural nets, NNext or NNhalt , depending on
the timestep. When the timestep t is odd, NNext takes Y and the driving time from i to j along rt | a (the con-
catenation of rt with a), and computes the node-pair scores oij ∀ i, j ∈ N × N . When t is even, NNhalt takes Y
and other statistics of G and Rt ∪ {rt } and outputs a probability of choosing ‘halt’ vs ‘continue’. The details of
these components are presented in Appendix 1, along with the details of the node and edge feature vectors.
We have released the code for our method and experiments to the public.1 .

4.1.1. Training
In our prior work (Holliday and Dudek 2023, 2024), we trained the policy net using the ‘REINFORCE with Base-
line’ method proposed by Williams (1992), with a reward function that gave a reward only at the end of the
MDP.:
                                             
                                              −C(G , Rt ) if t = tend
                                       Rt =                                                             (19)
                                              0            if t < tend

This was inspired by the similar approach taken by Kool, Hoof, and Welling (2019). However, sparse reward
functions like this one, where Rt = 0 at most timesteps, convey little information about the effect of each
action, making learning more difficult. So we here use the richer reward function we describe in Section 3.2.
   REINFORCE has also been superseded by more recent policy gradient learning algorithms. So in this work
we train the policy net using Proximal Policy Optimization with Generalized Advantage Estimation, a policy
gradient method proposed by Schulman et al. (2017) Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) was chosen for its
relative simplicity and for the fact that it still achieves state-of-the-art performance on many problems. PPO
works by running H timesteps of an MDP episode (or multiple episodes in parallel), and then computing an
                                                                                 TRANSPORTMETRICA B: TRANSPORT DYNAMICS      9


‘advantage’ At for each timestep:


                                             
                                             H−1
                                      At =           γ t Rt+t + γ H V(st+H ) − V(st )                                   (20)
                                             t =0



From this we compute the generalised advantage, Ât , a weighted sum of At over a range of values of the
horizon, H. Ât weights the updates to the policy, such that actions with a positive Ât are made more likely,
and those with a negative Ât are made less so.
   The value function V(st ) is itself a small Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) neural net that is trained in parallel
with the policy net. It takes the the cost weight parameter α and statistics of the city G and of the current
network Rt ∪ {rt } as input, and is trained to predict the discounted return GHt :


                                                     
                                                     H−1
                                          GHt =              γ t Rt+t + γ H V(st+H )                                    (21)
                                                     t =0


We train the policy and value nets on a dataset of synthetic cities. At each iteration, a full MDP episode is run in
parallel on each city in a ‘batch’ of cities from the dataset. We sample a different α ∼ [0, 1] for each training MDP
episode, while holding S, MIN, MAX, and the constraint weight β constant. The values to which we set these
hyperparameters are presented in Table A1. C(G , Rt ∪ {rt }), V(st ) and Ât are computed for each timestep of
each episode in the batch, and the policy and value nets are updated accordingly via PPO.
   To construct a synthetic city for the training dataset, we first generate its nodes and link network using one
of these processes chosen at random:

• 4-nn: Create the node set N by sampling n 2D points uniformly at random over a square. Then create Es by
  making link edges between each node i and its four nearest neighbours.
• 4-grid: Place n nodes in a rectangular grid as close to square as possible. Create Es by making link edges
  between all horizontal and vertical neighbours.
• 8-grid: The same as 4-grid, but also make link edges between diagonal neighbours.
• Voronoi: Sample m random 2D points in a square, and compute their Voronoi diagram (Fortune 1995). Let
  N and Es be the shared vertices and edges of the resulting Voronoi cells. m is chosen so |N | = n.

   In each process, we sample nodes (or the m points for Voronoi) in a 30 km × 30 km square, and assume a
fixed vehicle speed of v = 15 m/s to calculate link edge weights τij = (xi , yi ) − (xj , yj ) 2 /v. After each process
except Voronoi, we delete each edge in Es with probability ρ: if the resulting graph {N , Es } is not connected,
we discard it and repeat the process. This edge-deletion step adds more variety to the layouts of each type of
city, especially 4-grid and 8-grid types, which would otherwise all have the same structure.
   Finally, we generate the demand matrix D by setting diagonal demands Dii = 0, uniformly sampling above-
diagonal elements Dij in the range [60, 800], and then setting below-diagonal elements Dji = Dij if i < j to make
D symmetric.
   We generate a dataset of 215 = 32, 768 of these synthetic cities, setting n = 20 and ρ = 0.3. During training,
we randomly choose 90% of these cities to form the training set, and set aside the remaining 10% as a validation
set.
   In each iteration of training, we train on a batch of cities from the training set. After every ten iterations, we
run learned construction with the current policy net on every city in the validation set, and record the average
cost Cval of the resulting networks. At the end of training, we return the parameters θ that achieved the lowest
Cval , giving the final policy πθ . Training proceeds for 200 iterations in batches of 256 cities, as we found that
the policy stopped improving after this.
   During training, all neural net inputs are normalised so as to have zero mean and unit variance across the
entire dataset. The scaling and shifting parameters are saved as part of the policy net and are applied to new
data presented to πθ after training.
10      A. HOLLIDAY ET AL.


4.2. Evolutionary algorithm
To test the usefulness of a neural net policy for metaheuristic algorithms, we devised a ‘neural heuristic’ that
makes use of such a policy, and compared a simple baseline evolutionary algorithm to a variant of the baseline
that uses this neural heuristic. In this section, we describe these two evolutionary algorithms, as well as our
neural heuristic.
    Our baseline evolutionary algorithm is based on that of Nikolić and Teodorović (2013), with several modifi-
cations that we found improved its performance. We chose this algorithm because of its good performance for
relatively little computational cost, but we note that our learned policies could be used as heuristics in a wide
variety of metaheuristic algorithms. Nikolić and Teodorović (2013) describe their algorithm as a ‘bee colony
optimisation’ algorithm. As noted in Sörensen (2015), ‘bee colony optimisation’ is mathematically identical to
one kind of evolutionary algorithm, an older and well-established class of metaheuristic algorithms. To avoid
confusion and the spread of unnecessary terminology, we here refer to as an evolutionary algorithm and avoid
the ‘bee colony’ terminology.
    The algorithm operates on a population of B solutions B = {Rb | 1 ≤ b ≤ B}, and performs alternating
stages of mutation and selection. In the mutation stage, the algorithm applies two heuristics, type 1 and type
2, to different subsets of the population chosen at random. If the modified network Rb has lower cost than its
‘parent’ Rb , it replaces its parent in B : Rb ← Rb . This is repeated E times in the stage. Then, in the selection
stage, solutions either ‘die’ or ‘reproduce’, with probabilities inversely related to their cost C(G , Rb ). After IT
repetitions of mutation and selection, the algorithm returns the network R with the lowest C(G , R) from all
iterations.
    The type-1 and type-2 heuristics both begin by selecting, uniformly at random, a route r in Rb and a terminal
node i on r. The type-1 heuristic then selects a random node j = i in N , and replaces r with SPij , the shortest
path between i and j. The probability of choosing each node j is proportional to the amount of demand directly
satisfied by SPij . The type-2 heuristic does one of two things: with probability pd , it deletes i from r; otherwise,
it adds a random node j in i’s link-graph neighbourhood to r, making j the new terminal. Following Nikolić and
Teodorović (2013), we set pd = 0.2 in our experiments.
    The initial population of solutions is obtained by making B copies of a single initial solution, R0 . In our
prior work (Holliday and Dudek 2023), we found that using LC-100 to obtain R0 outperformed Nikolić and
Teodorović (2013)’s own method, so that is what both baseline and variant evolutionary algorithms do here.
We refer to this baseline evolutionary algorithm as ‘EA’.
    Our variant algorithm differs from EA only in that instead of using the type-1 heuristic, it uses a ‘neural
heuristic’ which is based on our neural net policy. The neural heuristic selects a route r ∈ Rb at random,
removes it from the network to get R̂b = Rb \ r, and then runs learned construction with πθ starting from
R̂b . Because |R̂b | = S − 1, this produces just one new route, r , which is then added to the network to
get Rb ← R̂b ∪ {r }. In this way we leverage πθ , which was trained as a policy for a construction method,
to aid in an improvement method. We refer to this variant algorithm as the neural evolutionary algorithm
(NEA). Both algorithms are presented in Algorithm 1, with the difference between the two described in
lines 10 and 11.
    We replace the type-1 heuristic with the neural heuristic because they each choose from a similar space of
changes: replacing one route by a shortest path in the former case, and replacing one route by a new route
composed of shortest paths in the latter.




5. Benchmark experiments
We first evaluated our method on the Mandl (1980) and Mumford (2013b) city datasets, two popular bench-
marks for evaluating NDP algorithms (Ahmed, Mumford, and Kheiri 2019; John, Mumford, and Lewis 2014; Kılıç
and Gök 2014; Mumford 2013a). Mandl is just one small synthetic city with fifteen nodes. The Mumford dataset
consists of four synthetic cities, labelled Mumford0 through Mumford3, and it specifies values of S, MIN, and
MAX to use when benchmarking on each city. The values n, S, MIN, and MAX for Mumford1, Mumford2, and
Mumford3 are taken from three different real-world cities and their existing transit networks, giving the dataset
a degree of realism. More details of these benchmark cities are given in Table 1.
                                                                   TRANSPORTMETRICA B: TRANSPORT DYNAMICS       11


Algorithm 1 Evolutionary Algorithm (Baseline and Neural)
 1: Input: G = (N , Es , D), SP, C, B, IT, E
 2: Construct initial network R0 ← LC-100(G , C)
 3: Rb ← R0 ∀ b ∈ integers 1 through B
 4: Rbest ← R0
 5: for i = 1 to IT do
 6:     // Mutation stage
 7:     for j = 1 to E do
 8:         for b = 1 to B do
 9:             if b ≤ B/2 then
10:                 if baseline algorithm (EA) then: Rb ← type_1_heuristic(Rb )
11:                if neural variant (NEA) then: Rb ← neural_heuristic(Rb )
12:            else
13:               Rb ← type_2_heuristic(Rb )
14:            if C(G , Rb ) < C(G , Rb ) then
15:                Rb ← Rb
16:         Randomly shuffle network indices b
17:     // Selection stage
18:     Cmax ← maxb C(G , Rb )
19:     Cmin ← minb C(G , Rb )
20:     for b = 1 to B do
21:         if C(G , Rb ) < C(G , Rbest ) then
22:             Rbest ← Rb
23:         // Select surviving networks
                      max −Cb
24:         Ob ← CCmax   −Cmin
25:         sb ∼ Bernoulli(1 − e−Ob )
26:         // Set survivor reproduction probabilities
27:         pb ←  O bOsb s 
                    b   b b

28:     if ∃ b ∈ [1, B] s.t. sb = 1 then
29:          // Replace non-survivors with survivors’ offspring
30:          for b = 1 to B do
31:              if sb = 0 then
32:                   k ∼ P(K), where P(K = b ) = pb
33:                   Rb ← Rk
34: return Rbest



    In all of our experiments, we set the transfer time penalty used in computing the average trip time Cp to 300s
(five minutes). This value is widely used in other work that reports results on these MDP benchmarks (Mum-
ford 2013a), so using this value of the transfer time penalty allows us to directly compare our own results with
these other results.


5.1. Comparison with baseline evolutionary algorithm
We ran each algorithm under consideration on all five of these synthetic cities over eleven different values of
α, ranging from 0.0 to 1.0 in increments of 0.1. This let us observe how well the different methods perform
over a range of possible user preferences, including the extremes of the operator perspective (α = 0.0, caring
only about Co ) and passenger perspective (α = 1.0, caring only about Cp ) as well as a range of intermediate
perspectives. In all of these experiments, we set the constraint weight β to 5.0, the same value used in training
the policies. We found that this was sufficient to prevent any of the constraints listed in Section 3 from being
violated by any transit network produced in our experiments.
12       A. HOLLIDAY ET AL.


Table 2. Cost C(α, G , R) achieved by LC-100, EA, and NEA for three diﬀerent α values. Costs are averaged over ten random
seeds; the ± value is the standard deviation of C(α, G , R) over the seeds.
α         Method                 Mandl          Mumford0            Mumford1             Mumford2            Mumford3
0.0        LC-100             0.697 ± 0.011   0.847 ± 0.025        1.747 ± 0.034       1.315 ± 0.049        1.333 ± 0.064
             EA               0.687 ± 0.016   0.776 ± 0.026        1.637 ± 0.065       1.067 ± 0.032        1.052 ± 0.041
            NEA               0.687 ± 0.016   0.783 ± 0.027        1.347 ±0.033        0.938 ± 0.024        0.927 ± 0.014
0.5        LC-100             0.558 ± 0.003   0.916 ± 0.006        1.272 ± 0.018       0.989 ± 0.021        0.984 ± 0.026
             EA               0.549 ± 0.008   0.841 ± 0.019        1.203 ± 0.026       0.866 ± 0.023        0.851 ± 0.025
            NEA               0.550 ± 0.006   0.840 ± 0.021        1.052 ± 0.013       0.816 ± 0.008        0.801 ± 0.008
1.0        LC-100             0.328 ± 0.001   0.721 ± 0.004        0.573 ± 0.004       0.495 ± 0.002        0.476 ± 0.001
             EA               0.315 ± 0.001   0.590 ± 0.005        0.523 ± 0.003       0.480 ± 0.001        0.464 ± 0.002
            NEA               0.315 ± 0.001   0.587 ± 0.004        0.520 ± 0.004       0.479 ± 0.002        0.460 ± 0.003



    Because these are stochastic algorithms, for each benchmark city we ran each algorithm ten times with
ten different random seeds. For algorithms that make use of a learned policy, we trained ten separate policies
with the same set of random seeds (but using the same training dataset), and used each policy when running
algorithms with the corresponding random seed. The values we report are statistics averaged over these ten
runs.
    We first compared our neural evolutionary algorithm (NEA) with our baseline evolutionary algorithm (EA).
We also compared both with the initial networks from LC-100, to see how much improvement each algorithm
makes over the initial networks. In the EA and NEA runs, the same parameter settings of B = 10, IT = 400,
E = 10 were used, following the values used in Nikolić and Teodorović (2013).
    Table 2 displays the cost C(G , R) achieved by each algorithm on the Mandl and Mumford benchmarks for
the operator perspective (α = 0.0), the passenger perspective (α = 1.0), and a balanced perspective (α = 0.5).
We see that on Mandl, the smallest of the five cities, EA and NEA perform virtually identically. But for the three
largest cities, NEA performs considerably better than EA for both the operator and balanced perspectives. On
Mumford3, the largest of the five cities, NEA solutions have 13% lower average cost for the operator perspec-
tive and 5% lower for the balanced perspective than EA. For the passenger perspective, NEA’s advantage over
EA is smaller, but it still outperforms EA on all of the Mumford cities.
    Figure 3 displays the average trip time Cp and total route time Co achieved by each algorithm on the three
largest Mumford cities, each of which are based on a real city’s statistics, at eleven α values evenly spaced over
the range [0, 1] in increments of 0.1. We observe that there is a trade-off between Cp and Co : Co increases and
Cp decreases as α increases. We also observe that for α < 1.0, NEA pushes Co much lower than LC-100 and EA.
Importantly, for any network R from LC-100 or EA, there is some value of α for which NEA produces a network
R that strictly dominates R, having equal or lower Cp and Co . Figure 3 also shows results for an additional
algorithm, LC-40k, which we discuss in Subsection 5.2.
    On Mumford1, Mumford2, and Mumford3, we observe a common pattern: EA and NEA perform very sim-
ilarly at α = 1.0 (the leftmost point on each curve), but a significant performance gap forms as α decreases.
We also observe that LC-100 favours reducing Cp over Co , with its points clustered at higher Co and lower Cp
than the points with corresponding α values on the other curves. EA and NEA each achieve only very small
decreases in Cp on LC-100’s initial solutions at α = 1.0, but much larger decreases in Co at lower α.


5.2. Ablation studies
To better understand the contribution of various components of our method, we performed three sets of abla-
tion studies. These were conducted over the three largest Mumford cities (1, 2, and 3), and over the same range
of α values as in Subsection 5.1.

5.2.1. Effect of number of samples
Over the course of the evolutionary algorithm with our parameter settings (B = 10, IT = 400, E = 10), a total
of B × IT × E = 40, 000 different transit networks are considered. By comparison, LC-100 only considers 100
networks. To test how much of NEA’s superiority to LC-100 is due to this difference, we repeated our experi-
ments with the LC-40k algorithm, which is the same as LC-100 except that it samples 40, 000 networks from
the learned-construction procedure instead of 100.
                                                                             TRANSPORTMETRICA B: TRANSPORT DYNAMICS         13




Figure 3. Trade-oﬀs between average trip time Cp (on the x-axis) and total route time Co (on the y-axis), across values of α
over the range [0, 1] in increments of 0.1, from α = 0.0 at lower-right to 1.0 at upper-left, for transit networks from LC-100,
LC-40k, EA, and NEA. Each point shows the mean Cp and Co over 10 random seeds for one value of α, and bars around each
point indicate one standard deviation on each axis. Lines linking pairs of points indicate that they represent consecutive α
values. Lower values of Co and Cp are better, so the down-and-leftward direction in each plot represents improvement.


   Comparing LC-100 and LC-40k in Figure 3, we see that across all three cities and all values of α, LC-40k
improves on LC-100 only slightly by comparison with EA or NEA. From this we conclude that the number of net-
works considered is not the main cause of EA’s and NEA’s advantage over LC-100: the evolutionary algorithm
itself makes most of the difference.

5.2.2. Effect of type-2 heuristic
The type-2 heuristic is the same between EA and NEA and is not a learned function. To understand how impor-
tant this heuristic is to NEA’s performance, we ran ‘all-1 NEA’, a variant of NEA in which the type-2 heuristic is
dropped and only the neural heuristic is used. The results are shown in Figure 4, along with the curve for NEA
(reproduced from Figure 3) for comparison.
   It is clear that NEA and all-1 NEA perform very similarly in most scenarios. The main difference is at α = 1.0,
where we see that all-1 NEA under-performs NEA, achieving higher Cp (though it also achieves lower Co , due
to the inherent trade-off between Cp and Co ). It appears that the type-2 heuristic’s ability to extend existing
routes is important at α = 1.0, where making routes longer cannot make the network worse, but otherwise at
α < 1.0 the neural heuristic does just as well on its own, without the type-2 heuristic.

5.2.3. Effect of reinforcement learning
The type-1 heuristic used in EA and the neural heuristic used in NEA differ in the kind of routes they create. The
type-1 heuristic can only add routes that are shortest paths in the link graph, while the neural heuristic may
compose multiple shortest paths into a new route. We sought to determine how much of NEA’s advantage
over EA is due to this structural difference, versus being due to the specific policy πθ that we trained using RL.
   To answer this question, we ran a variant of NEA in which πθ is replaced by a purely random policy πrandom :

                                                                   1
                                            πrandom (a | st ) =            ∀ a ∈ At                                       (22)
                                                                  |A t |
14       A. HOLLIDAY ET AL.




Figure 4. Trade-oﬀs between average trip time Cp (on the x-axis) and total route time Co (on the y-axis) achieved by all-1 NEA,
plotted along with NEA (repeated from Figure 3) for comparison.


We call this variant of NEA the randomly-combining evolutionary algorithm (RC-EA). In order to fully isolate
RC-EA from the effects of RL, we also used πrandom in the LC-100 algorithm to generate the starting network
R0 for RC-EA.
    The results are shown in Figure 5, again with the same NEA curve from Figure 3 for comparison. For val-
ues of α < 1.0, the transit networks from RC-EA are dominated by some transit network from NEA. But at the
extreme of α = 1.0, RC-EA’s network performs better than any of NEA’s networks in terms of average trip time
Cp , decreasing it by about twenty seconds versus NEA’s lowest-Cp network on each city – an improvement of
about 1%.
    RC-EA’s poor performance at α < 1 makes sense: the ability to replace routes with composites of shortest
paths biases it towards making longer routes, and unlike πθ , πrandom cannot learn to prefer halting early in
such cases. This is a clear disadvantage at α < 1.0. The advantage of NEA comes mainly from what the policy
πθ learns during training. It is surprising, though, that RC-EA outperforms NEA at α = 1.0. We would expect
that the neural net policy used in NEA should be able to equal the performance of RC-EA by learning to choose
actions uniformly at random when α = 1.0, yet here it fails to do so.
    Nonetheless, NEA performs better overall than RC-EA, and so we leave answering this question to future
work, while noting that composing shortest paths randomly is a good heuristic for minimising Cp at the
expense of Co , if that is one’s aim.


5.3. Comparisons with prior work
We next sought to compare NEA directly against other NDP algorithms from the literature. It is common prac-
tice in this literature to report results on the Mandl and Mumford benchmarks only for the operator perspective
(α = 0.0) and the passenger perspective (α = 1.0), so in this section we compare NEA against other algorithms
only on these two settings of α.
   While conducting the experiments of Subsection 5.1, we observed that after 400 iterations the cost of NEA’s
best-so-far network Rbest was still decreasing from one iteration to the next. We thus performed a further set
of experiments where we ran NEA with IT = 4, 000 instead of IT = 400. In addition, because we observed
good results from RC-EA at α = 1.0, we ran RC-EA with IT = 4, 000 at α = 1.0, and we include these results in
                                                                         TRANSPORTMETRICA B: TRANSPORT DYNAMICS         15




Figure 5. Trade-oﬀs between average trip time Cp (on the x-axis) and total route time Co (on the y-axis) achieved by RC-EA,
plotted along with NEA (repeated from Figure 3) for comparison.


the comparison below. On a desktop computer with a 2.4 GHz Intel i9-12900F processor and an NVIDIA RTX
3090 graphics processing unit (used to accelerate our neural net computations), NEA takes about 10 h for each
4,000-iteration run on Mumford3, the largest environment, while RC-EA takes about 6 h.
   By comparison, on Mumford3, Mumford (2013a) report no running times; Zervas et al. (2024) run their
algorithm for 3 h; Kılıç and Gök (2014) do not report total running time, but take 8 h just to construct the initial
network; Ahmed, Mumford, and Kheiri (2019) run their algorithm for 10 h; and Hüsselmann, van Vuuren, and
Andersen (2024) and John, Mumford, and Lewis (2014) run theirs for more than two days. So NEA with IT = 4,
000 falls near the middle of the distribution of computational costs of methods we compare it with, making
this a fair comparison.
   Tables 3 and 4 present the results of these IT = 4, 000 runs on the Mandl and Mumford benchmarks, along-
side results reported on these benchmarks in comparable recent work. As elsewhere, the results we report
for NEA and RC-EA are averaged over ten runs with different random seeds; the same set of ten trained poli-
cies used in the experiments of Subsections 5.1 and 5.2 are used here in NEA. In addition to the average trip
time Cp and total route time Co , these tables present d0 , d1 , d2 , and dun , which indicate how many transfers
between routes passengers had to make when using the transit network: di with i ∈ {0, 1, 2} is the percentage
of all passenger trips that required i transfers, while dun is the percentage of trips that require more than two
transfers:
                                             dun = 100 − (d0 + d1 + d2 )                                              (23)


5.3.1. Note on omitted work
In these comparisons, we exclude two recent papers that report results on the Mumford benchmark: these are
Islam et al. (2019), and Wens and Vansteenwegen (2024). Both works report passenger-perspective results that
are computed in non-standard ways: Islam et al. (2019) ignore passenger trips that take more than 2 transfers
when computing Cp , while Wens and Vansteenwegen (2024) ignore constraint 1 from the constraints listed in
Section 3, allowing the network to fail to connect some pairs of nodes. This means that their reported Cp values
are not directly comparable with our own, nor with those reported in other work on the NDP. We exclude them
so that the differences between compared results are attributable only to the algorithms that produced them.
16         A. HOLLIDAY ET AL.


Table 3. Passenger-perspective results.
City                                       Method                                    Cp ↓          Co         d0 ↑          d1           d2         dun ↓
Mandl             Mumford (2013a)                                                   10.27         221        95.38         4.56         0.06           0
                  John, Mumford, and Lewis (2014)                                   10.25         212          –             –           –             –
                  Kılıç and Gök (2014)                                              10.29         216         95.5          4.5           0            0
                  Ahmed, Mumford, and Kheiri (2019)                                 10.18         212        97.17         2.82         0.00           0
                  Hüsselmann, van Vuuren, and Andersen (2024) DBMOSA                10.27         179        95.94         3.93         0.13           0
                  Hüsselmann, van Vuuren, and Andersen (2024) NSGA-II               10.19         197        97.36         2.64           0            0
                  Zervas et al. (2024)                                              10.19          –         97.94         2.06           0            0
                  NEA                                                               10.37         181        93.89         5.93         0.18           0
                  RC-EA                                                             10.27         193        95.83         4.16         0.01           0
Mumford0          Mumford (2013a)                                                   16.05         759         63.2        35.82         0.98           0
                  John, Mumford, and Lewis (2014)                                   15.4          745          –             –           –             –
                  Kılıç and Gök (2014)                                              14.99         707        69.73        30.03         0.24           0
                  Ahmed, Mumford, and Kheiri (2019)                                 14.09         722        88.74        11.25           0            0
                  Hüsselmann, van Vuuren, and Andersen (2024) DBMOSA                15.48         431         65.5         34.5          0             0
                  Hüsselmann, van Vuuren, and Andersen (2024) NSGA-II               14.34         635        86.94        13.06           0            0
                  Zervas et al. (2024)                                              14.76          –          91.0          9.0           0            0
                  NEA                                                               15.26         639        68.35        31.24         0.41           0
                  RC-EA                                                             14.62         735        77.87        22.13         0.00           0
Mumford1          Mumford (2013a)                                                   24.79        2038         36.6        52.42        10.71         0.26
                  John, Mumford, and Lewis (2014)                                   23.91        1861          –            –            –            –
                  Kılıç and Gök (2014)                                              23.25        1956         45.1        49.08        5.76          0.06
                  Ahmed, Mumford, and Kheiri (2019)                                 21.69        1956        65.75        34.18        0.07           0
                  Hüsselmann, van Vuuren, and Andersen (2024) DBMOSA                22.31        1359        57.14        42.63        0.23           0
                  Hüsselmann, van Vuuren, and Andersen (2024) NSGA-II               21.94        1851        62.11        37.84        0.05           0
                  Zervas et al. (2024)                                              22.73         –          55.26        43.58        1.16           0
                  NEA                                                               22.85        1723        49.28        48.94        1.78           0
                  RC-EA                                                             22.29        2032        53.47        45.96        0.57           0
Mumford2          Mumford (2013a)                                                   28.65        5632        30.92        51.29        16.36         1.44
                  John, Mumford, and Lewis (2014)                                   27.02        5461          –            –            –            –
                  Kılıç and Gök (2014)                                              26.82        5027        33.88        57.18        8.77          0.17
                  Ahmed, Mumford, and Kheiri (2019)                                 25.19        5257        56.68        43.26        0.05           0
                  Hüsselmann, van Vuuren, and Andersen (2024) DBMOSA                25.65        3583        48.07        51.29        0.64           0
                  Hüsselmann, van Vuuren, and Andersen (2024) NSGA-II               25.31        4171        52.56        47.33        0.11           0
                  Zervas et al. (2024)                                              25.71         –          57.84         42.0         0.16           0
                  NEA                                                               25.25        4937        52.66        47.05        0.29           0
                  RC-EA                                                             24.92        5655        54.12        45.85        0.04           0
Mumford3          Mumford (2013a)                                                   31.44        6665        27.46        50.97        18.79         2.81
                  John, Mumford, and Lewis (2014)                                   29.5         6320          –            –            –            –
                  Kılıç and Gök (2014)                                              30.41        5834        27.56        53.25        17.51         1.68
                  Ahmed, Mumford, and Kheiri (2019)                                 28.05        6119        50.41        48.81         0.77          0
                  Hüsselmann, van Vuuren, and Andersen (2024) DBMOSA                28.22        4060        45.07        54.37        0.56           0
                  Hüsselmann, van Vuuren, and Andersen (2024) NSGA-II               28.03        5018        48.71         51.1        0.19           0
                  Zervas et al. (2024)                                              28.1          –          61.59        38.17        0.24           0
                  NEA                                                               27.96        6127        49.36        50.04        0.60           0
                  RC-EA                                                             27.60        6896        50.90        48.99        0.11           0
Note: Cp is the average passenger trip time. Co is the total route time. di is the percentage of trips satisﬁed with number of transfers i, while dun is the
 percentage of trips satisﬁed with 3 or more transfers. Arrows next to each quantity indicate which of increase or decrease is desirable. Bold values
 in Cp , d0 , and dun columns are the best for that city.




5.3.2. Results
Table 3 shows the passenger perspective results. On Mandl, Mumford0, and Mumford1, Ahmed, Mumford, and
Kheiri (2019)’s method performs best. But on Mumford3 – the most challenging benchmark city – our NEA
algorithm outperforms all other methods in the literature, improving on the previous best of Hüsselmann, van
Vuuren, and Andersen (2024)’s NSGA-II by 0.3%. Meanwhile, RC-EA performs best of all on both Mumford2 and
Mumford3, improving on Mumford3’s previous best Cp by 1.5%, and setting a new state-of-the-art on these
two challenging benchmarks.
   Table 4 shows the operator-perspective results. Kılıç and Gök (2014) and Zervas et al. (2024) do not report
results for the operator perspective, so are not included here. Similarly to the passenger perspective, NEA here
underperforms on the smallest cities (Mandl and Mumford0), but outperforms all methods other than Ahmed,
Mumford, and Kheiri (2019) on Mumford1 and Mumford2, including the more recent work of Hüsselmann, van
Vuuren, and Andersen (2024). And on the most challenging city, Mumford3, NEA again outperforms all other
methods, improving on the previous state-of-the-art Co by 4.8%.
                                                                                            TRANSPORTMETRICA B: TRANSPORT DYNAMICS                       17


Table 4. Operator perspective results.
City                                       Method                                   Co ↓          Cp          d0 ↑          d1           d2         dun ↓
Mandl             Mumford (2013a)                                                    63          15.13       70.91        25.5          2.95         0.64
                  John, Mumford, and Lewis (2014)                                    63          13.48         –            –            –             –
                  Ahmed, Mumford, and Kheiri (2019)                                  63          14.28       62.23        27.16         9.57         1.03
                  Hüsselmann, van Vuuren, and Andersen (2024) DBMOSA                 63          13.55       70.99        24.44         4.00         0.58
                  Hüsselmann, van Vuuren, and Andersen (2024) NSGA-II                63          13.49       71.18        25.21         2.97         0.64
                  NEA                                                                68          13.89       57.87        33.77         8.20         0.15
Mumford0          Mumford (2013a)                                                    111         32.4        18.42         23.4        20.78        37.40
                  John, Mumford, and Lewis (2014)                                     95         32.78         –            –            –            –
                  Ahmed, Mumford, and Kheiri (2019)                                  94          26.32       14.61        31.59        36.41        17.37
                  Hüsselmann, van Vuuren, and Andersen (2024) DBMOSA                 98          27.61       22.39        31.27        18.82        27.51
                  Hüsselmann, van Vuuren, and Andersen (2024) NSGA-II                94          27.17       24.71        38.31        26.77        10.22
                  NEA                                                                122         30.20       15.34        30.77        27.82        26.08
Mumford1          Mumford (2013a)                                                    568         34.69       16.53        29.06        29.93         24.66
                  John, Mumford, and Lewis (2014)                                    462         39.98         –            –            –             –
                  Ahmed, Mumford, and Kheiri (2019)                                  408         39.45       18.02        29.88         31.9         20.19
                  Hüsselmann, van Vuuren, and Andersen (2024) DBMOSA                 511         26.48       25.17        59.33        14.54         0.96
                  Hüsselmann, van Vuuren, and Andersen (2024) NSGA-II                465         31.26       19.70        42.09        33.87         4.33
                  NEA                                                                434         47.07       17.24        26.85        26.45         29.46
Mumford2          Mumford (2013a)                                                   2244         36.54       13.76        27.69        29.53         29.02
                  John, Mumford, and Lewis (2014)                                   1875         32.33         –            –            –             –
                  Ahmed, Mumford, and Kheiri (2019)                                 1330         46.86       13.63        23.58        23.94         38.82
                  Hüsselmann, van Vuuren, and Andersen (2024) DBMOSA                1979         29.91       22.77        58.65        18.01         0.57
                  Hüsselmann, van Vuuren, and Andersen (2024) NSGA-II               1545         37.52       13.48        36.79        34.33         15.39
                  NEA                                                               1356         54.82       10.99        22.41        27.00         39.60
Mumford3          Mumford (2013a)                                                   2830         36.92       16.71        33.69        33.69         20.42
                  John, Mumford, and Lewis (2014)                                   2301         36.12         –            –            –             –
                  Ahmed, Mumford, and Kheiri (2019)                                 1746         46.05       16.28        24.87        26.34         32.44
                  Hüsselmann, van Vuuren, and Andersen (2024) DBMOSA                2682         32.33       23.55        58.05        17.18         1.23
                  Hüsselmann, van Vuuren, and Andersen (2024) NSGA-II               2043         35.97       15.02        48.66        31.83         4.49
                  NEA                                                               1663         61.25       11.48        19.86        25.07         43.59
Note: Cp is the average passenger trip time. Co is the total route time. di is the percentage of trips satisﬁed with number of transfers i, while dun is the
 percentage of trips satisﬁed with 3 or more transfers. Arrows next to each quantity indicate which of increase or decrease is desirable. Bold values
 in Co , d0 and dun columns are the best for that city.



   Despite NEA and RC-EA’s relatively simple metaheuristic, these two algorithms set a new state of the art on
the most challenging of NDP benchmarks shows that on large city graphs, our neural heuristic is superior to
earlier non-neural heuristics. And in the passenger-perspective case, our non-neural heuristic of randomly con-
catenating shortest paths performs even better. The pattern in these results, where the relative performance
of our heuristics increases with the size of the city n, also suggests that their advantage may continue to grow
for cities larger than those found in these benchmarks.
   When optimising just one metric as in the above experiments, our method achieves low values of that metric
by driving the other metric very high, as can be seen in the Co column of Table 3 and the Cp column of Table 4.
This is because of the inherent trade-off between Cp and Co : shorter, more direct routes reduce operating cost
but connect fewer pairs of nodes directly, requiring passengers to make more transfers and increasing the cost
to passengers.
   The metrics d0 to dun reveal that at α = 0.0, NEA favours higher numbers of transfers relative to most of
the other methods, particularly (Hüsselmann, van Vuuren, and Andersen 2024). This matches our intuitions:
shorter routes will deliver fewer passengers directly to their destinations and will require more transfers, so it is
logical that the learned policies would tend to increase the number of transfers when rewarded for minimising
operating cost. Meanwhile, at α = 1.0, the numbers of transfers achieved by NEA and RC-EA are comparable
to other recent methods, except for Zervas et al. (2024). Unlike our method and the others compared here,
their algorithm directly incorporates the number of transfers in the cost function that it minimises, resulting in
fewer transfers but less impressive Cp .


6. Case study: laval
To assess our method in a realistic case, we applied it to a simulation of the city of Laval in Quebec, Canada. Laval
is a suburb of the major Canadian city of Montreal (Figure 6). As of the 2021 census, it had a total population of
18      A. HOLLIDAY ET AL.


                        Table 5. Statistics and parameters of the Laval scenario.
                        # nodes n   # link edges |Es |   # demand trips   # routes S   MIN   MAX   Area (km2 )
                        632              4,544              548,159          43         2    52      520.1




about 430,000 (Statistics Canada 2023). Public transit in Laval is provided primarily by the bus network of the
Société de Transport de Laval; additionally, the Orange Line of the Montreal underground metro system has
three stops in Laval.
   We constructed a city graph to represent Laval based on the 2021 census dissemination areas (CDAs)
obtained from Statistics Canada (Statistics Canada 2021), a GIS representation of the road network of Laval
provided to us by the Société de Transport de Laval, an Origin-Destination (OD) dataset (Agence Métropoli-
taine de transport 2013) provided by Quebec’s Agence Métropolitaine de Transport, and publicly-available
GTFS data from 2013 (Société de Transport de Laval n.d) that describes Laval’s existing transit system.
   Each node in the graph represents the centroid of a CDA, with edges connecting it to the nodes of neigh-
bouring CDAs, weighted by the average travel time between them over the road network. The demand matrix
D was derived from the OD dataset, which gave an estimated number of trips between every pair of locations
based on a large survey of Laval residents. Trips that went outside of Laval to Montreal were redirected to one
of several points in the graph where a metro route or bus route in STL’s existing transit system crosses into
Montreal. This yielded a graph with 632 nodes. Table 5 contains the statistics of, and parameters used for, the
Laval scenario.
   For the full details of how the graph was constructed from this data, we refer the reader to chapter 5 of
Holliday (2024).


6.1. Existing transit
Laval’s existing transit network has 43 daytime bus routes. To compare networks from our algorithm to this
network, we mapped each stop on these routes to the nearest node in the node set N based on which CDA
contains the stop; duplicate stops on the resulting routes were merged. We refer to this translation of the real
transit network as the STL network.
   The Montreal metro system’s Orange Line has three stops in Laval. As with the bus routes, we mapped
these stops to their containing CDAs to form an extra metro route m, which is treated as being present in all
simulations. We also included this route in the MDP by setting R0 = {m}, so that our neural policies would
take it as input and account for it.
   The numbers of stops on the routes in the STL network range from 2 to 52. To ensure a fair comparison, we
set the constraint parameters to S = 44 (43 plus 1 for the metro line), MIN = 2 and MAX = 52 when running
our algorithm. Unlike the routes in our algorithm’s networks, some of STL’s routes are asymmetric or unidi-
rectional. We allowed this in our simulation of STL, while still requiring symmetry and bidirectionality for the
transit networks from our algorithms. For this reason, when reporting total route time Co in this section, it is
calculated by summing the travel times of bidirectional routes in both directions, instead of just one direction
as we do elsewhere.


6.2. Enforcing constraint satisfaction
In the experiments on the Mandl and Mumford benchmark cities described in Section 5, the EA and NEA algo-
rithms reliably produced networks that satisfied all of the constraints outlined in Section 3. However, Laval’s
city graph, with 632 nodes, is considerably larger than the largest Mumford city, which has only 127 nodes.
In our initial experiments on Laval, we found that both EA and NEA consistently failed to satisfy constraint 1,
producing networks that left some pairs of nodes disconnected.
    To remedy this, we modified the MDP described in Subsection 3.2 to enforce reduction of unsatisfied
demand wherever possible. Let c1 (G , R) be the number of node-pairs i, j with Dij > 0 for which network
R provides no transit path, and let Rt = Rt ∪ {rt } be the network formed from the finished routes and the
in-progress route rt . We made the following changes to the action space At whenever c1 (G , Rt ) > 0:
                                                                             TRANSPORTMETRICA B: TRANSPORT DYNAMICS            19




Figure 6. (a) shows a map of the census dissemination areas of the city of Laval, with ‘crossover points’ used to remap inter-city
demands shown as black circles, and the Montreal Metro Orange Line shown in orange. (b) shows the link graph constructed
from these dissemination areas. (a) Census dissemination areas (b) Link graph.



• When the timestep t is even and At = {continue, halt}, the ‘halt’ action is removed from At . This means that
  the current route must be extended if it is possible to do so without violating another constraint.
• When t is odd, if At contains any paths that would reduce c1 (G , Rt ) if added to rt , then all paths that would
  not reduce c1 (G , Rt ) are removed from At . This means that if it is possible to meet some unmet demand by
  extending rt , then it must be done.

    With these changes to the MDP, we found that both LC-100 and NEA reliably produced networks that sat-
isfied all constraints, even using policies πθ trained without these changes. The results reported in this section
were obtained using this variant of the MDP.


6.3. Experiments
We evaluated both the NEA and RC-EA algorithms on the Laval city graph. We ran three sets of NEA experiments
representing different perspectives: the operator perspective (α = 0.0), the passenger perspective (α = 1.0),
and a balanced perspective (α = 0.5). We only ran RC-EA at α = 1.0 because as we observed previously in
Subsection 5.2.3, RC-EA performs poorly at α < 1.0. As in Section 5, we perform ten runs of each experiment
with ten different random seeds and the same ten different learned policies πθ as in our other experiments,
and we report statistics over these ten runs.
   We kept the same parameters of NEA and RC-EA that we used in Subsection 5.1: IT = 400, B = 10, E = 10,
and a 300s transfer penalty. Although the computer memory requirements of running our algorithms on this
very large graph were greater than for the Mumford benchmark datasets, the desktop machine used for our
Mumford experiments proved adequate for the Laval experiments as well, and no changes to our model or
algorithm were required to reduce memory usage.


6.3.1. Results
The results of the Laval experiments are shown in Table 6. The results for the initial networks produced by LC-
100 are presented as well, to show how much NEA improves on these initial networks. Figure 7 highlights the
trade-offs each method achieves between average trip time Cp and total route time Co .
20         A. HOLLIDAY ET AL.




Figure 7. Average trip time Cp versus total route time Co achieved by LC-100 and NEA at α = 0.0 (bottom-right), 0.5 (middle),
and 1.0 (top-left), as well as for RC-EA at α = 1.0 and the STL network (independent of α). Except for STL, each point is a mean
value over 10 random seeds, and bars show one standard deviation.


Table 6. Performance of LC-100 and NEA’s networks at three α values, RC-EA’s networks at α = 1.0, and the STL network.
α           Method               Cp ↓                     Co ↓                  d0 ↑                    d1                   d2                  dun ↓
N/A          STL                123.52                   23954                  15.75                  25.86                22.87                 35.51
0.0         LC-100          106.08 ± 6.74            18797 ± 190            15.45 ± 0.54           22.98 ± 1.34         23.71 ± 1.08          37.86 ± 1.87
             NEA            113.33 ± 9.78           18037 ± 302             15.44 ± 0.47           22.50 ± 1.72         23.23 ± 1.27          38.83 ± 2.67
0.5         LC-100           86.25 ± 3.88            20341 ± 549            15.04 ± 0.46           26.46 ± 1.10         26.76 ± 1.18          31.74 ± 2.22
             NEA             86.14 ± 2.99           19494 ± 389             14.89 ± 0.62           26.18 ± 1.53         26.59 ± 1.69          32.34 ± 2.90
1.0         LC-100           66.64 ± 2.56           29286 ± 3815            17.16 ± 1.27           34.50 ± 3.49         29.03 ± 1.00          19.30 ± 4.81
             NEA             59.38 ± 0.52           44314 ± 1344            22.08 ± 0.71           38.79 ± 2.03         27.57 ± 0.75          11.56 ± 2.22
            RC-EA            57.40 ± 0.17           48700 ± 1001            23.73 ± 0.57           44.31 ± 0.71         25.20 ± 0.62          6.76 ± 0.58
Note: Bold values are the best for the corresponding α, except where STL performs best at that α, in which case no values are bold. Cp is the average
 passenger trip time. Co is the total route time. di is the percentage of trips satisﬁed with i transfers, while dun is the percentage of trips satisﬁed with
 3 or more transfers. All values are averaged over ten random seeds, with one standard deviation following ‘±’ where relevant.



    For each value of α, NEA’s network outperforms the STL network: it achieves 52% lower passenger cost Cp
at α = 1.0, 25% lower operating cost Co at α = 0.0, and at α = 0.5 it achieves 30% lower Cp and 19% lower Co .
At both α = 0.0 and α = 0.5, NEA dominates the existing transit system, achieving both lower Cp and lower
Co .
    Comparing NEA’s results to LC-100, we see that at α = 0.0, NEA decreases Co and increases Cp relative to LC-
100, and for α = 1.0, the reverse is true. In both cases, NEA improves over the initial network on the objective
being optimised, at the cost of the other, as we would expect. In the balanced case (α = 0.5), we see that NEA
decreases Co by 4% and Cp by 0.1% relative to LC-100. This matches what we observed in Subsection 5.1: NEA’s
improvements over LC-100 tend to be greater in Co than in Cp . RC-EA, meanwhile, improves on NEA in terms
of Cp at α = 1.0, as it did in our other experiments. Here, it decreases Cp by two minutes on average, or about
3.3%.
    Looking at the transfer percentages d0 , d1 , d2 , and dun , we see that as α increases, the overall number of
transfers shrinks, with d0 , d1 and d2 growing and dun shrinking. At α = 1.0 RC-EA achieves the fewest transfers.
But at both α = 0.5 and α = 1.0, NEA also decreases the overall number of transfers relative to the STL network.
    The likely aim of Laval’s transit agency is to reduce costs while improving service quality, so the ‘balanced’
case, where α = 0.5, is the most relevant in reality. Some simple calculations can give us a rough estimate of
savings NEA offers in this case. The approximate cost of operating a Laval city bus is 200 Canadian dollars (CAD)
per hour. If each route has the same headway (time between bus arrivals) h, the number of buses Nr required
by route r is  τhr . The total number of buses NR required for a transit network R is then:

                                                                               1      Co
                                                        NR =            Nr ≈       τr =                                                                (24)
                                                                                h       h
                                                                  r∈R              r∈R
                                                                      TRANSPORTMETRICA B: TRANSPORT DYNAMICS        21


The total cost of the system is then 200 CAD×NR . Assuming a headway of 15 minutes on all routes, that gives
a per-hour operating cost of 319,387 CAD for the STL network. By comparison, the networks from NEA with
α = 0.5 cost 259,920 CAD per hour on average, saving the transit agency 59,500 CAD per hour.


7. Discussion
The choice of heuristics has a major impact on the effectiveness of a metaheuristic algorithm, and our results
show that neural heuristics trained by deep reinforcement learning can outperform human-engineered heuris-
tics on the transit network design problem. Neural heuristics can also be useful in complex real-world transit
planning scenarios, where they can improve an existing transit system in multiple dimensions.
    Our heuristic-training method has several limitations. One is that the construction process on which our
neural net policies are trained differs from the evolutionary algorithm – an improvement process – in which it
is deployed. We would like to train our neural net policies directly in the context of an improvement process,
which may make them better-suited to that process.
    Another limitation is that we only train neural net policies to make one kind of change to a transit network:
concatenating multiple shortest paths into a new route and adding it to the network. In future, we wish to train
a more diverse set of policies, perhaps including route-lengthening and -shortening operators that also could
be included as heuristics in a metaheuristic algorithm.
    It would also be worthwhile to apply our neural heuristics within other metaheuristics than just the evo-
lutionary algorithm developed here. Multi-objective metaheuristic algorithms could use neural heuristics in
tandem with Pareto optimal solution methods such as TOPSIS (Papathanasiou and Ploskas 2018) to find
optimal transit networks.
    One remaining question is why the random path-combining heuristic used in the RC-EA experiments out-
performs the neural net heuristic for the passenger perspective. As noted in Subsection 5.2.3, in principle the
neural net should be able to learn to imitate a random policy if that gives the best outcome. We wish to explore
in more depth why this does not occur, and whether changes to the policy architecture or learning algorithm
might allow the neural heuristic’s performance to match or exceed that of the random policy.
    Our aim in this paper was to show whether neural heuristics can be used in a lightweight metaheuris-
tic algorithm to improve its performance. Our results show that they can, and in fact that they can allow a
simple metaheuristic algorithm to set new state-of-the-art results on challenging benchmark cities. This is
compelling evidence that they may help transit agencies substantially reduce operating costs while delivering
better service to riders in real-world scenarios.


Note
 1. Available at https://github.com/aholliday/transit_learning.


Acknowledgements
We thank the Société de Transport de Laval for the map data and transportation data they provided to us, and the Agence
Métropolitaine de Transport of Quebec for the origin-destination dataset that they provided. This data was essential to
the experiments presented in this paper. And we thank Joshua Katz for acting as a sounding board for ideas and giving
feedback on our experimental designs.


Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).


Funding
This work was supported by NSERC under Grant 223292.


ORCID
Andrew Holliday     http://orcid.org/0000-0002-1507-6505
22       A. HOLLIDAY ET AL.


References
Agence Métropolitaine de Transport. 2013. “Enquête Origine-Destination 2013.” Montreal, QC.
Ahmed, Leena, Christine Mumford, and Ahmed Kheiri. 2019. “Solving Urban Transit Route Design Problem Using Selection
   Hyper-heuristics.” European Journal of Operational Research 274 (2): 545–559. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2018.10.022.
Ai, Guanqun, Xingquan Zuo, Gang Chen, and Binglin Wu. 2022. “Deep Reinforcement Learning Based Dynamic Optimiza-
   tion of Bus Timetable.” Applied Soft Computing 131:109752. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2022.109752.
Aksoy, İlyas Cihan, and Mehmet Metin Mutlu. 2024. “Comparing the Performance of Metaheuristics on the Transit Network
   Frequency Setting Problem.” Journal of Intelligent Transportation Systems 28: 1–20. https://doi.org/10.1080/15472450.2024.
   2392722.
Applegate, David, Robert E. Bixby, Vašek Chvátal, and William J. Cook. 2001. “Concorde TSP Solver.” https://www.math.
   uwaterloo.ca/tsp/concorde/index.html.
Battaglia, Peter W., Jessica B. Hamrick, Victor Bapst, Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Vinicius Zambaldi, Mateusz Mali-
   nowski, Andrea Tacchetti, et al. 2018. “Relational Inductive Biases, Deep Learning, and Graph Networks.” Preprint
   arXiv:1806.01261.
Bengio, Yoshua, Andrea Lodi, and Antoine Prouvost. 2021. “Machine Learning for Combinatorial Optimization: A Method-
   ological Tour D’horizon.” European Journal of Operational Research 290 (2): 405–421. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2020.
   07.063.
Brody, Shaked, Uri Alon, and Eran Yahav. 2021. “How Attentive Are Graph Attention Networks?” https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.
   14491.
Bruna, Joan, Wojciech Zaremba, Arthur Szlam, and Yann LeCun. 2013. “Spectral Networks and Locally Connected Networks
   on Graphs.” Preprint arXiv:1312.6203.
Chen, Xinyun, and Yuandong Tian. 2019. “Learning to Perform Local Rewriting for Combinatorial Optimization.” Advances
   in Neural Information Processing Systems 32.
Chien, Steven I-Jy, Yuqing Ding, and Chienhung Wei. 2002. “Dynamic Bus Arrival Time Prediction with Artificial Neural
   Networks.” Journal of Transportation Engineering 128 (5): 429–438. https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)0733-947X(2002)128:
   5(429).
Choo, Jinho, Yeong-Dae Kwon, Jihoon Kim, Jeongwoo Jae, André Hottung, Kevin Tierney, and Youngjune Gwon. 2022.
   “Simulation-Guided Beam Search for Neural Combinatorial Optimization.” Advances in Neural Information Processing
   Systems 35:8760–8772.
Çodur, Muhammed Yasin, and Ahmet Tortum. 2009. “An Artificial Intelligent Approach to Traffic Accident Estimation:
   Model Development and Application.” Transport 24 (2): 135–142. https://doi.org/10.3846/1648-4142.2009.24.135-142.
da Costa, Paulo, Jason Rhuggenaath, Yingqian Zhang, and Alp Akcay. 2020. “Learning 2-opt Heuristics for the Traveling
   Salesman Problem via Deep Reinforcement Learning.” In Asian Conference on Machine Learning, 465–480. Bangkok,
   Thailand: PMLR.
Dai, Hanjun, Elias B. Khalil, Yuyu Zhang, Bistra Dilkina, and Le Song. 2017. “Learning Combinatorial Optimization Algorithms
   over Graphs.” Preprint arXiv:1704.01665.
Darwish, Ahmed, Momen Khalil, and Karim Badawi. 2020. “Optimising Public Bus Transit Networks Using Deep Rein-
   forcement Learning.” In 2020 IEEE 23rd International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC), 1–7. Rhodes,
   Greece: IEEE.
Defferrard, Michaël, Xavier Bresson, and Pierre Vandergheynst. 2016. “Convolutional Neural Networks on Graphs with Fast
   Localized Spectral Filtering.” CoRR. http://arxiv.org/abs/1606.09375.
Durán-Micco, Javier, and Pieter Vansteenwegen. 2022. “A Survey on the Transit Network Design and Frequency Setting
   Problem.” Public Transport 14 (1): 155–190. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12469-021-00284-y.
Duvenaud, David K., Dougal Maclaurin, Jorge Iparraguirre, Rafael Bombarell, Timothy Hirzel, Alán Aspuru-Guzik, and Ryan P.
   Adams. 2015. “Convolutional Networks on Graphs for Learning Molecular Fingerprints.” Advances in Neural Information
   Processing Systems 28.
Fortune, Steven. 1995. “Voronoi Diagrams and Delaunay Triangulations.” In Computing in Euclidean Geometry, 225–265.
   Boca Raton, Florida: CRC Press.
Fu, Zhang-Hua, Kai-Bin Qiu, and Hongyuan Zha. 2021. “Generalize A Small pre-trained Model to Arbitrarily Large TSP
   Instances.” In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 35, 7474–7482.
Gilmer, Justin, Samuel S. Schoenholz, Patrick F. Riley, Oriol Vinyals, and George E. Dahl. 2017. “Neural Message Passing for
   Quantum Chemistry.” In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning, edited by Doina Precup
   and Yee Whye Teh, Vol. 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, 1263–1272. Sydney, Australia: PMLR.
Guan, J. F., Hai Yang, and S. C. Wirasinghe. 2006. “Simultaneous Optimization of Transit Line Configuration and Passenger
   Line Assignment.” Transportation Research Part B: Methodological 40:885–902. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trb.2005.12.003.
Guihaire, Valérie, and Jin-Kao Hao. 2008. “Transit Network Design and Scheduling: A Global Review.” Transportation
   Research Part A: Policy and Practice 42 (10): 1251–1273.
Holliday, Andrew, and Gregory Dudek. 2023. “Augmenting Transit Network Design Algorithms with Deep Learning.” In
   2023 26th IEEE International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC). Bilbao, Spain: IEEE.
Holliday, Andrew, and Gregory Dudek. 2024. “A Neural-Evolutionary Algorithm for Autonomous Transit Network Design.”
   In Presented at 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). Yokohama, Japan: IEEE.
                                                                           TRANSPORTMETRICA B: TRANSPORT DYNAMICS           23


Holliday, Andrew. 2024. “Applications of Deep Reinforcement Learning to Urban Transit Network Design.” PhD diss., McGill
    University.
Hottung, André, and Kevin Tierney. 2019. “Neural Large Neighborhood Search for the Capacitated Vehicle Routing
    Problem.” Preprint arXiv:1911.09539.
Hüsselmann, Günther, Jan Harm van Vuuren, and Simen Johann Andersen. 2024. “An Improved Solution Methodology for
    the Urban Transit Routing Problem.” Computers & Operations Research 163:106481. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.2023.
    106481.
Islam, Kazi Ashik, Ibraheem Muhammad Moosa, Jaiaid Mobin, Muhammad Ali Nayeem, and M. Sohel Rahman. 2019.
    “A Heuristic Aided Stochastic Beam Search Algorithm for Solving the Transit Network Design Problem.” Swarm and
    Evolutionary Computation 46:154–170. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.swevo.2019.02.007.
Jeong, Ranhee, and R. Rilett. 2004. “Bus Arrival Time Prediction Using Artificial Neural Network Model.” In Proceedings of
    the 7th International IEEE Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (IEEE Cat. No. 04TH8749), 988–993. Washington,
    DC: IEEE.
Jiang, Zhibin, Wei Fan, Wei Liu, Bingqin Zhu, and Jinjing Gu. 2018. “Reinforcement Learning Approach for Coordinated
    Passenger Inflow Control of Urban Rail Transit in Peak Hours.” Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies
    88:1–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2018.01.008.
John, Matthew P., Christine L. Mumford, and Rhyd Lewis. 2014. “An Improved Multi-objective Algorithm for the Urban Tran-
    sit Routing Problem.” In Evolutionary Computation in Combinatorial Optimisation, edited by Christian Blum and Gabriela
    Ochoa, 49–60. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Kar, Armita, Andre L. Carrel, Harvey J. Miller, and Huyen T. K. Le. 2022. “Public Transit Cuts during COVID-19 Com-
    pound Social Vulnerability in 22 US Cities.” Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment 110:103435.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trd.2022.103435.
Kepaptsoglou, Konstantinos, and Matthew Karlaftis. 2009. “Transit Route Network Design Problem: Review.” Journal of
    Transportation Engineering 135 (8): 491–505. https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)0733-947X(2009)135:8(491).
Kim, Minsu, Jinkyoo Park, and Joungho Kim. 2021. “Learning Collaborative Policies to Solve NP-hard Routing Problems.”
    Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34:10418–10430.
Kingma, Diederik P., and Jimmy Ba. 2015. “Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization.” In ICLR. San Diego, California.
Kipf, Thomas N., and Max Welling. 2016. “Semi-supervised Classification with Graph Convolutional Networks.” Preprint
    arXiv:1609.02907.
Kool, W., H. V. Hoof, and M. Welling. 2019. “Attention, Learn to Solve Routing Problems!” In ICLR. New Orleans, Louisiana.
Kılıç, Fatih, and Mustafa Gök. 2014. “A Demand Based Route Generation Algorithm for Public Transit Network Design.”
    Computers & Operations Research 51:21–29. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.2014.05.001.
Li, Can, Lei Bai, Wei Liu, Lina Yao, and S. Travis Waller. 2020. “Graph Neural Network for Robust Public Transit Demand Predic-
    tion.” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 23:4086–4098. https://doi.org/10.1109/TITS.2020.3041234.
Li, Can, Lei Bai, Lina Yao, S. Travis Waller, and Wei Liu. 2023. “A Bibliometric Analysis and Review on Reinforcement Learning
    for Transportation Applications.” Transportmetrica B: Transport Dynamics 11 (1):2179461.
Lin, Haifeng, and Chengpei Tang. 2022. “Analysis and Optimization of Urban Public Transport Lines Based on Multiobjec-
    tive Adaptive Particle Swarm Optimization.” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 23 (9): 16786–16798.
    https://doi.org/10.1109/TITS.2021.3086808.
Liu, Luyu, Harvey J. Miller, and Jonathan Scheff. 2020. “The Impacts of COVID-19 Pandemic on Public Transit Demand in the
    United States.” PloS One 15 (11): e0242476. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0242476.
Ma, Yining, Jingwen Li, Zhiguang Cao, Wen Song, Le Zhang, Zhenghua Chen, and Jing Tang. 2021. “Learning to Iteratively
    Solve Routing Problems with Dual-Aspect Collaborative Transformer.” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
    34:11096–11107.
Mandl, Christoph E. 1980. “Evaluation and Optimization of Urban Public Transportation Networks.” European Journal of
    Operational Research 5 (6): 396–404. https://doi.org/10.1016/0377-2217(80)90126-5.
Mirhoseini, Azalia, Anna Goldie, Mustafa Yazgan, Joe Wenjie Jiang, Ebrahim Songhori, Shen Wang, Young-Joon Lee, et al.
    2021. “A Graph Placement Methodology for Fast Chip Design.” Nature 594 (7862): 207–212. https://doi.org/10.1038/s4
    1586-021-03544-w.
Mumford, Christine L. 2013a. “New Heuristic and Evolutionary Operators for the Multi-objective Urban Transit Routing
    Problem.” In 2013 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation, 939–946. Cancun, Mexico: IEEE.
Mumford, Christine L. 2013b. “Supplementary Material for: New Heuristic and Evolutionary Operators for the Multi-
    objective Urban Transit Routing Problem, CEC 2013.” Accessed March 24, 2023. https://users.cs.cf.ac.uk/C.L.Mumford/
    Research%20Topics/UTRP/CEC2013Supp.zip.
Mundhenk, T. Nathan, Mikel Landajuela, Ruben Glatt, Claudio P. Santiago, Daniel M. Faissol, and Brenden K. Petersen. 2021.
    “Symbolic Regression via Neural-Guided Genetic Programming Population Seeding.” Preprint arXiv:2111.00053.
Nikolić, Miloš, and Dušan Teodorović. 2013. “Transit Network Design by Bee Colony Optimization.” Expert Systems with
    Applications 40 (15): 5945–5955. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2013.05.002.
Papathanasiou, Jason, and Nikolaos Ploskas. 2018. Multiple Criteria Decision Aid: Methods, Examples and Python Implemen-
    tations. Cham, Switzerland: Springer International Publishing.
Rodrigue, Jean-Paul. 1997. “Parallel Modelling and Neural Networks: An Overview for Transportation/land Use Systems.”
    Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 5 (5): 259–271. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0968-090X(97)00014-4.
24       A. HOLLIDAY ET AL.


Schulman, John, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. 2017. “Proximal Policy Optimization
   Algorithms.” Preprint arXiv:1707.06347.
Société de Transport de Laval. n.d.. “GTFS Data for the Société de Transport de Laval Bus Network.” Retreived 2020.
   https://transitfeeds.com/p/societe-de-transport-de-laval/38/1383528159.
Sörensen, Kenneth, Marc Sevaux, and Fred Glover. 2018. “A History of Metaheuristics.” In Handbook of Heuristics, 791–808.
   Cham, Switzerland: Springer.
Sörensen, Kenneth. 2015. “Metaheuristics–the Metaphor Exposed.” International Transactions in Operational Research 22
   (1): 3–18. https://doi.org/10.1111/itor.2015.22.issue-1.
Statistics Canada. 2021. “Census Dissemination Area Boundary Files.” Accessed July 1, 2023. https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/
   n1/en/catalogue/92-169-X.
Statistics Canada. 2023. “Census Profile, 2021 Census of Population.” Accessed October 25, 2023. https://www12.statcan.gc.
   ca/census-recensement/2021/dp-pd/prof/details/page.cfm.
Sutton, Richard S., and Andrew G. Barto. 2018. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. London, England: MIT Press.
Sykora, Quinlan, Mengye Ren, and Raquel Urtasun. 2020. “Multi-agent Routing Value Iteration Network.” In International
   Conference on Machine Learning, 9300–9310. PMLR.
van Nes, Rob. 2003. “Multiuser-Class Urban Transit Network Design.” Transportation Research Record 1835 (1): 25–33.
   https://doi.org/10.3141/1835-04.
Vinyals, Oriol, Meire Fortunato, and Navdeep Jaitly. 2015. “Pointer Networks.” Preprint arXiv:1506.03134.
Wang, Tao, Zhipeng Zhu, Jing Zhang, Junfang Tian, and Wenyi Zhang. 2024. “A Large-Scale Traffic Signal Control Algorithm
   Based on Multi-layer Graph Deep Reinforcement Learning.” Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies
   162:104582. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2024.104582.
Wei, Yu, Minjia Mao, Xi Zhao, Jianhua Zou, and Ping An. 2020. “City Metro Network Expansion with Reinforcement Learning.”
   In Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, 2646–2656.
Wens, Maarten, and Pieter Vansteenwegen. 2024. “A Decentralised Genetic Algorithm with sub-objectives for the Transit
   Network Design Problem.” Computers & Operations Research 183:107191. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.2025.107191.
Williams, Ronald J. 1992. “Simple Statistical Gradient-following Algorithms for Connectionist Reinforcement Learning.”
   Machine Learning 8 (3): 229–256. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1022672621406.
Wu, Fei, Changjiang Zheng, Muqing Du, Wei Ma, and Junze Ma. 2025. “Heterogeneous Multi-view Graph Gated Neural
   Networks for Real-Time Origin-Destination Matrix Prediction in Metro Systems.” Transportmetrica B: Transport Dynamics
   13 (1):2449483.
Wu, Yaoxin, Wen Song, Zhiguang Cao, Jie Zhang, and Andrew Lim. 2021. “Learning Improvement Heuristics
   for Solving Routing Problems.” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems 33 (9): 5057–5069.
   https://doi.org/10.1109/TNNLS.2021.3068828.
Xiong, Yihua, and Jerry B. Schneider. 1992. “Transportation Network Design Using a Cumulative Genetic Algorithm and
   Neural Network.” Transportation Research Record 1364.
Yan, Haoyang, Zhiyong Cui, Xinqiang Chen, and Xiaolei Ma. 2023. “Distributed Multiagent Deep Reinforcement
   Learning for Multiline Dynamic Bus Timetable Optimization.” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics 19:469–479.
   https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2022.3158651.
Yang, Jie, and Yangsheng Jiang. 2020. “Application of Modified NSGA-II to the Transit Network Design Problem.” Journal
   of Advanced Transportation 2020: 1–24.
Ye, Haoran, Jiarui Wang, Zhiguang Cao, Helan Liang, and Yong Li. 2024. “DeepACO: Neural-Enhanced Ant Systems for
   Combinatorial Optimization.” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36.
Ying, Rex, Ruining He, Kaifeng Chen, Pong Eksombatchai, William L. Hamilton, and Jure Leskovec. 2018. “Graph Convolu-
   tional Neural Networks for Web-Scale Recommender Systems.” CoRR http://arxiv.org/abs/1806.01973.
Yoo, Sunhyung, Jinwoo Brian Lee, and Hoon Han. 2023. “A Reinforcement Learning Approach for Bus Network Design and
   Frequency Setting Optimisation.” Public Transport 15:503–534. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12469-022-00319-y.
Zervas, Alexandros, Christina Iliopoulou, Ioannis Tassopoulos, and Grigorios Beligiannis. 2024. “Solving Large-Scale
   Instances of the Urban Transit Routing Problem with a Parallel Artificial Bee Colony-Hill Climbing Optimization
   Algorithm.” Applied Soft Computing 167:112335. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2024.112335.
Zhang, Xinshao, Zhaocheng He, Yiting Zhu, and Linlin You. 2023. “DRL-based Adaptive Signal Control for Bus Priority
   Service under Connected Vehicle Environment.” Transportmetrica B: Transport Dynamics 11 (1): 1455–1477.
Zou, Liang, Jian-min Xu, and Ling-xiang Zhu. 2006. “Light Rail Intelligent Dispatching System Based on Reinforcement
   Learning.” In 2006 International Conference on Machine Learning and Cybernetics, 2493–2496. Dalian, China.




Appendices
Appendix 1. Neural net architecture
In this appendix, we give a detailed description of the architecture of the neural net policy that is used in our neural
heuristic. The policy πθ is a neural net with three components: a GAT ‘backbone’, a halting module NNhalt , and an exten-
sion module NNext . The halting and extension modules both operate on the outputs from the GNN. All nonlinearities are
                                                                               TRANSPORTMETRICA B: TRANSPORT DYNAMICS              25


ReLU functions. A common embedding dimension of dembed = 64 is used throughout; unless otherwise specified, each
component of the system outputs vectors of this dimension.


A.1      Input features
The policy net operates on three inputs: an n × 4 matrix of node feature vectors X, an n × n × 13 tensor of edge features
E, and a global state vector s.
    A node feature xi is composed of the (x, y) coordinates of the node and its in-degree and out-degree in the link graph.
    An edge feature eij is composed of the following elements:

 (1) Dij , the demand between the nodes
 (2) sij = 1 if (i, j, τij ) ∈ Es , 0 otherwise
 (3) τij if (i, j, τij ) ∈ Es , 0 otherwise
 (4) cij = 1 if R links i to j, 0 otherwise
 (5) c0ij = 1 if j can be reached from i over R with no transfers, 0 otherwise
 (6) c1ij = 1 if one transfer is needed to reach j from i over R, 0 otherwise
 (7) c2ij = 1 if two transfers are needed to reach j from i over R, 0 otherwise
 (8) qij = 1 if i = j, 0 otherwise
 (9) τRij if R links i to j, 0 otherwise
(10) τrij if j can be reached from i over R with no transfers, where r is the route that provides the shortest direct trip
     between i and j. If i and j are not linked with no transfers, has value 0
(11) Tij , the shortest-path driving time between i and j
(12) α
(13) 1 − α

      The global state vector st at timestep t is composed of:

(1)    Cp (G , Rt ∪ {rt }), the average passenger trip time for the current route set
(2)    Co (G , Rt ∪ {rt }), the total route time for the current route set
(3)    |Rt |, the number of routes planned so far
(4)    S − |Rt |, the number of routes left to plan
(5)    Fun , the fraction of node pairs with demand dij > 0 that are not connected by Rt ∪ {rt })
(6)    α
(7)    1−α

      Note that α and 1 − α are included in both s and eij .


A.2      Backbone network
The backbone is a graph attention net composed of five GATv2 (Brody, Alon, and Yahav 2021) multi-head graph attention
layers separated by ReLU nonlinearities. 4 heads are used in each multi-head attention layer. The network takes as input the
node feature collection X and the edge features E, and the final layer outputs an n × dembed matrix of node embeddings
Y. These node embeddings are used by the two policy heads to compute action probabilities.


A.3      Halting module
NNhalt is a simple feed-forward MLP with 2 hidden layers. It takes as input st , τrt , and yi and yj , where i and j are the first and
last nodes on rt . It outputs a scalar h, to which we apply the sigmoid function to get the halting policy:
                                                                             1
                                                π(halt | st ) = σ (h) =                                                          (A1)
                                                                          1 + e−h
                                                π(continue | st ) = 1 − π(halt | st )                                            (A2)


A.4      Extension module
The extension module NNext computes the policy on odd-numbered timesteps, when extensions are selected for routes.
It consists of two components. The first is an MLP called MLPext1 , that computes the node-pair scores oaij that are used to
calculate the probability of selecting each extension path a to the current route rt . It takes as input the time between i and
j along the path p being considered, τpij ; the node embeddings yi and yj , and the edge feature eij , and outputs a score opij .
When considering extending an existing route rt by a path a, that act would connect each pair of nodes on a, as well as
each node already on rt to each node on a. So the score oa is just the sum of the node-pair scores for the node pairs that
26       A. HOLLIDAY ET AL.


                                    Table A1. Training hyper-parameters.
                                    Hyper-Parameter                                                          Value
                                    Baseline model learning rate                                          5 × 10−4
                                    Baseline model weight decay                                              0.01
                                    Policy learning rate                                                   0.0016
                                    Policy weight decay                                                  8.4 × 10−4
                                    Number of training iterations                                            200
                                    Discount rate γ                                                          0.95
                                    PPO CLIP threshold                                                        0.2
                                    Generalized Advantage Estimation λ                                       0.95
                                    Batch size                                                               256
                                    Horizon                                                                  120
                                    Num. epochs                                                                1
                                    Constraint weight β                                                       5.0
                                    S                                                                         10
                                    MIN                                                                        2
                                    MAX                                                                       12
                                    Adam α                                                                  0.001
                                    Adam β1                                                                   0.9
                                    Adam β2                                                                 0.999



this choice would link together on the route:
                                                                                    
                                              o(rt | a) =                 oaij +               o(rt | a)ij                      (A3)
                                                            i∈a,j∈a,i=j            i∈rt ,j∈a

If α = 0, then the benefit of choosing a path a to start or extend a route depends on its driving time τa , and generally on
the state s. And if 0 < α < 1, then the benefit of a depends on these as well as on the edges it adds to ER , and so depends
on o(r | a) . We account for this with a second MLP, called MLPext2 , that takes as input st , τa , and the previous score o(r | a) ,
and outputs a final scalar score ôa for each candidate path. The extension policy is then the softmax of these values:
                                                                              eôa
                                                       πθ (a|s) =                      ôa
                                                                                                                                (A4)
                                                                             a  ∈A e
We thus treat the outputs of NNext as un-normalised log-probabilities of the possible actions during an extension step.


A.5    Value network
The PPO training algorithm requires a learnable value function V(st ) to compute the advantage At = GHt − V(st ) during
                      V(st ) as an MLP with
training. We parameterise
                                            
                                              2 hidden layers of dimension 36. The inputs to V(st ) are the average of the
                        x
node feature vectors ni i , the total demand i,j Dij , the means and standard deviations of the elements of D and T, the
cost component weight α, and the state vector st .
    We experimented with using an additional neural net head that would compute the value estimate V(st ) based on the
same node embeddings Y as NNext and NNhalt , but found that this offered no benefit over the version described here.


Appendix 2. Training hyper-parameters
Training of the neural net policies is performed using the PPO reinforcement learning algorithm in conjunction with the
well-known Adam optimiser (Kingma and Ba 2015) to update the neural net’s parameters based on the losses given by PPO.
Table A1 gives the hyper-parameters used during training. We augment the training dataset by applying a set of random
transformations In each iteration of training. These include rescaling the node positions by a random factor uniformly
sampled in the range [0.4, 1.6], rescaling the demand magnitudes by a random factor uniformly sampled in the range
[0.8, 1.2], mirroring node positions about the y axis with probability 0.5, and revolving the node positions by a random
angle in [0, 2π) about their geometric center.
    We also randomly sample α separately for each training city in each batch. Each time alpha is sampled, it has equal
probability of being set to 0.0, set to 1.0, or sampled uniformly in the range [0, 1]. This is to encourage the policy to learn
to handle not only intermediate cases, but also the extreme cases where only Cp or only Co matters.
    Although it is typical to use an entropy-maximisation term in the loss function when using PPO, we found better results
by dropping this term, so we do not use it when training out policies.
    A set of preliminary experiments with a range of values for the discount rate γ led us to set this parameter to γ = 0.95.
